Propose a second EWG bidding project: Refactoring of OSM website notes (#9)
osmfoundation/ewg_bidding: projects/openstreetmap-website-notes-refactoring/README.md

# OpenStreetMap-Website: Refactor Notes

The goal of this project is to refactor the existing notes implementation on the OSM website.

* Project: [openstreetmap-website](https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website)
* Related:
  - https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/3831
  - maybe https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3934

The expected deliverable is a mergeable pull request towards https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website. It must at least:

> - Follow the idea of a refactoring by changing as little as reasonable by improving the underlying code structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Follow the idea of a refactoring by changing as little as possible in behaviour and improving the underlying code structure
```

The goal of this project is to refactor the existing notes implementation on the OSM website.

* Project: [openstreetmap-website](https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website)
* Related:
  - https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/3831
  - maybe https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3934

The expected deliverable is a mergeable pull request towards https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website. It must at least:
- Follow the idea of a refactoring by changing as little as possible in behaviour and improving the underlying code structure
- Handle the UI part – Map, Forms, Lists, …
- Handle the API part – without any breaking changes to the API
- Handle the Data migration of existing data – discuss details with the operations team
- Handle freatures related to moderation and administration
- Handle special cases for blocked users, hidden or removed notes and similar cases
- Include a wireframe of all proposed UI changes
- Conform to the [CONTRIBUTING.md doc](https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Positive effects of this project

**Remove bugs and improve stability:**

> - There are situations when the Notes API returns an error 500 right now. This refactoring will solve the underlying issue. There are multiple issues and even more dupliactes on this topic, eg. https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/2146.

Reviewer 2: There's no error 500 returned by the api in this case

Reviewer: Is https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/2146 wrong or has situation changed?

What happens when one is displaying a note with no comments (for example where reporter was deleted)?

Reviewer 2: Error 500 is in the web ui, not in the api.

Author: @AntonKhorev I change the wording to only reference the issue.

> - It will also solve edgecases like https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/3396

Reviewer 2: Why is it an "also" case?

The first kind of "situations" (with error 500) is a subset of the "edgecases" referred here. If the user is deleted and nobody else did anything with the note, you get error 500. If somebody did something, that somebody gets promoted to note author.

Author: @AntonKhorev I change the wording to only reference the issue.

> - It will make the API more stable and easier to handle for data consumers of the API as well. StreetComplete and NotesReview (https://github.com/ENT8R/NotesReview/issues/113) are two apps that reported related problems.

Reviewer 2: What is "It"? You can either have notes vanishing on user deletes or you'll have no changes from the point of view of the api. Vanishing notes will introduce other questions, such as are they hidden with the already existing hidden state or are they "super-hidden"? If they are hidden with the already existing state, what happens if they are un-hidden? Do you still record the hide action or do you hide them without any action?

Author: @AntonKhorev I removed this section.

> - It will make the API more stable and easier to handle for data consumers of the API as well. StreetComplete and NotesReview (https://github.com/ENT8R/NotesReview/issues/113) are two apps that reported related problems.

Reviewer 3: Issue with NotesReview has since been resolved.
Ref https://github.com/ENT8R/NotesReview/issues/113#issuecomment-1784059483

Author: @danieldegroot2 I removed this bullet point.

- It will make proposed workarounds obsolete which will make the code simpler and reduce maintance burdens, eg. https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3617, https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/3744, https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3607, https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3608

**Solid foundation for follow up projects:**

There are multiple issues discussing additions to the notes system. They all require a solid foundation which this project will provide. For example:

> - Add a `source` flag to notes and comments to indicate the app or website that created the note/comment, see https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/3932

Reviewer 4: I think the terminology here would be more like `created_by` (https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:created_by) as in "the program that allowed the human to create the note) than `source` (https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Key:source) as in "the source of information used by the human".

The distinction may be relevant because (similar to changeset) a note could have both, however the  `created_by` (or what being used to contain the program) potentially be mandatory, and the other might be optional.

Author: @fititnt I updated the document. In case the new wording does not work for you, please suggest a full alternative line so I may copy it. Please keep in mind that this section is only meant to be an inspiration on what will be possible once the core is solid.

> - Extend the API for moderation use cases, see https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3934

Reviewer 2: There's nothing that requires extending right now. If you add the "super-hidden" state however, you'll complicate things here.

Author: @AntonKhorev my assumption is, that all features on notes are on hold until the foundation is solid. Which is why I added this line to the list "Solid foundation for follow up projects".

> - Update the list-of-notes-UI, see https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3386

Reviewer 2: `status` already exists on notes (in addition to comments-actions), so nothing is going to change here.

Author: @AntonKhorev my assumption is, that all features on notes are on hold until the foundation is solid. Which is why I added this line to the list "Solid foundation for follow up projects".

# OpenStreetMap-Website: Refactor Notes

The goal of this project is to refactor the existing notes implementation on the OSM website.

* Project: [openstreetmap-website](https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website)
* Related:
  - https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/3831
  - maybe https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3934

The expected deliverable is a mergeable pull request towards https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website. It must at least:
- Follow the idea of a refactoring by changing as little as possible in behaviour and improving the underlying code structure
- Handle the UI part – Map, Forms, Lists, …
- Handle the API part – without any breaking changes to the API
- Handle the Data migration of existing data – discuss details with the operations team

> - Handle freatures related to moderation and administration

Reviewer 3: > freatures
Should be 'features'.

Author: Thanks @danieldegroot2. Btw, are you aware of this feature 
<img width="238" alt="image" src="https://github.com/osmfoundation/ewg_bidding/assets/111561/63281b95-0ee3-48a1-9445-1f00a36659a0">?

Reviewer 3: I've mostly reviewed existing commits, so I haven't used it I suppose.

> - Handle freatures related to moderation and administration

Author: ```suggestion
- Handle features related to moderation and administration
```

- Include a wireframe of all proposed UI changes
- Conform to the [CONTRIBUTING.md doc](https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md)

## Positive effects of this project

**Remove bugs, improve stability and reduce maintenance burden:**

For example:

- An issue about notes without comments https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/2146
- Another issue related to notes without comments https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/3396
- https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/3744 is waiting on the refactoring before being reviewed
- Multiple pull request can be closed which are workarounds for the current implementation. For example https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3617, https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3607, https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/pull/3608

**Solid foundation for follow up projects:**

There are multiple issues discussing additions to the notes system. They all require a solid foundation which this project will provide. For example:

> - Improve notes/comments with an optional information on the app or website that created the note/comment, see https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/3932

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Improve notes/comments with optional details on the app or website that created the note/comment, see https://github.com/openstreetmap/openstreetmap-website/issues/3932
```
